      Robert Sheckley: The Demons



      Fantasy Magazine, 1953 © with kindly permission by the author (email 30 
      Dec 2000).
      Reprinted in Untouched by Human Hands. New York: Ace,1979. 135–149.
      
      Walking along Second Avenue, Arthur Gammet decided it was a rather nice 
      spring day. Not too cold, just brisk and invigorating. A perfect day for 
      selling insurance, he told himself . He stepped off the curb at Ninth 
      Street. 
      And vanished. 
      "Didja see that?" A butcher's assistant asked the butcher. They had been 
      standing in front of their store, idly watching people go by. 
      "See what?" the butcher, a corpulent, red-faced man, replied. 
      "The guy in the overcoat. He disappeared." 
      "Yeh," the butcher said. "So he turned up Ninth, so what?"
      The butcher's assistant hadn't seen Arthur turn up Ninth, down Ninth, or 
      across Second. He had seen him disappear. But should he insist on it? You 
      tell your boss he's wrong, so where does it get you? Besides, the guy in 
      the overcoat probably had turned up Ninth. Where else could he have gone? 
      But Arthur Gammet was no longer in New York. He had thoroughly vanished. 
      Somewhere else, not necessarily on Earth, a being who called himself 
      Neelsebub was staring at a pentagon. Within it was something he hadn't 
      bargained for. Neelsebub fixed it with a bitter stare, knowing he had good 
      cause for anger. He'd spent years digging out magic formulas, 
      experimenting with herbs and essences, reading the best books on wizardry 
      and witchcraft. He'd thrown everything into one gigantic effort, and what 
      happened? The wrong demon appeared. 
      Of course, there were many things that might have gone amiss. The severed 
      hand of the corpse—it just might have been the hand of a suicide, for even 
      the best of dealers aren't to be trusted. Or the line of the pentagon 
      might have been the least bit wavy; that was very significant. Or the 
      words of the incantation might not have been in the proper order. Even one 
      syllable wrongly intoned could have done it. 
      Anyhow, the damage was done. Neelsebub leaned one red-scaled shoulder 
      against the huge bottle in back of him, scratching the other shoulder with 
      a dagger-like fingernail. As usual when perplexed, his barbed tail flicked 
      uncertainly. 
      At least he had a demon of some sort. 
      But the thing inside the pentagon didn't look like any conventional kind 
      of demon. Those loose folds of gray flesh, for example ... But, then the 
      historical accounts were notoriously inaccurate. Whatever kind of 
      supernatural being it was, it would have to come across. Of that he was 
      certain. Neelsebub folded his hooved feet under him more comfortably, 
      waiting for the strange being to speak. 

      Arthur Gammet was still too stunned to speak. One moment he had been 
      walking to the insurance office, minding his own business, enjoying the 
      fine air of an early spring morning. He had stepped off the curb at Second 
      and Ninth—and landed here. Wherever here was. 
      Swaying slightly, he made out, through the deep mist that filled the room, 
      a huge red-scaled monster squatting on its haunches. Beside it was what 
      looked like a bottle, but a bottle fully ten feet high. The creature had a 
      barbed tail and was now scratching his head with it, glaring at Arthur out 
      of little piggish eyes. Hastily, Arthur tried to step back, but was unable 
      to move more than a step. He was inside a chalked area, he noticed, and 
      for some reason was unable to step over the white lines. 
      "So," the red creature said, finally breaking the silence. "I've finally 
      got you." These weren't the words he was saying; the sounds were utterly 
      foreign. But somehow, Arthur was able to understand the thought behind the 
      words. It wasn't telepathy, but rather as though he were translating a 
      foreign language, automatically, colloquially. 
      "I must say I'm rather disappointed," Neelsebub continued when the 
      captured demon in the pentagon didn't answer. "All our legends say that 
      demons are fearful things, fifteen feet high, with wings and tiny heads 
      and a hole in the chest that throws out jets of cold water." 
      Arthur Gammet peeled off his overcoat, letting it fall in a sodden heap at 
      his feet. Dimly, he could appreciate the idea of demons being able to 
      produce jets of cold water. The room was like a furnace. Already his gray 
      tweed suit was a soggy, wrinkled mass of cloth and perspiration. 
      And with that thought came acceptance—of the red creature, the chalk lines 
      he was unable to cross, the sweltering room—everything. 
      He had noticed in books, magazines and motion-pictures that a man, 
      confronted by an odd situation, usually mouthed lines such as, "Pinch me, 
      this can't be true," or, "Good God, I'm either dreaming, drunk or crazy." 
      Arthur had no intention of saying anything so palpably absurd. For one 
      thing, he was sure the huge red creature wouldn't appreciate it; and for 
      another, he knew he wasn't dreaming, drunk or crazy. There were no words 
      in Arthur Gammet's vocabulary for it, but he knew. A dream was one thing; 
      this was another. 

      "The legends never mentioned being able to peel off your skin," Neelsebub 
      said thoughtfully, looking at the overcoat at Arthur's feet. "Interesting. 
      " 
      "This is a mistake," Arthur said firmly. The experience he had had as an 
      insurance agent stood him in good stead now. He was used to meeting all 
      kinds of people, unraveling all kinds of snarled situations. This creature 
      had, evidently, tried to raise a demon. Through nobody's fault he had 
      gotten Arthur Gammet, and was under the impression that he was a demon. 
      The error must be rectified at once. 
      "I am an insurance agent," he said. The creature shook its tremendous 
      horned head. Its tail swished from side to side unpleasantly. 
      "Your other-world functions don't concern me in the slightest," Neelsebub 
      growled. "I don't care, really, what species of demon you are." 
      "But I tell you I'm not a—" 
      "It won't work!" Neelsebub howled, glaring angrily at Arthur from the edge 
      of the pentagon. "I know you're a demon. And I want drast!" 
      "Drast? I don't think—" 
      "I'm up to all your demoniac tricks," Neelsebub said, calming himself with 
      obvious effort. "I know—and you know—that when a demon is conjured, he 
      must grant one wish. I conjured you, and I want drast. Ten thousand pounds 
      of it." 
      "Drast . . ." Arthur began uncomfortably, standing in the corner of the 
      pentagon furthest from the taillashing monster. 
      "Drast, or voot, or hakatinny, or sup-der-oop. It's all the same thing." 
      It was speaking of money, Arthur Gammet realized. The slang terms had been 
      unfamiliar but there was no mistaking the sense behind them. Undoubtedly, 
      drast was what passed for currency in its country. 
      "Ten thousand pounds isn't much," Neelsebub said with a cunning little 
      smile. "Not for you. You ought to be glad I'm not one of those fools who 
      ask for immortality." 
      Arthur was. 
      "And if I don't?" he asked. 
      "In that case," Neelsebub replied, a frown replacing the little smile, 
      "I'll be forced to conjure you again—inside the bottle." Arthur looked at 
      the green bottle, towering over Neelsebub's head. It was wide at its misty 
      base, tapering to a slim neck. If the thing ever got him in, he would 
      never be able to squeeze out through that neck. If the thing could get him 
      in. And Arthur was fairly sure it could. 

      "Of course," Neelsebub said, his smile returning, more cunning than ever, 
      "There's no reason for heroic measures. Ten thousand pounds of the old 
      sup-der-oop isn't much for you. It'll make me rich, but all you have to do 
      is wave your hand. " He paused, his smile becoming ingratiating. 
      "You know," he went on softly. "I've really spent a long time on this. 
      Read a lot of books, spent a pile of voot. " His tail lashed the floor 
      suddenly, like a bullet glancing off granite. "Don't try to put something 
      over on me!" he shouted. 
      Arthur found that the force rising from the chalk extended as high as he 
      could reach. Gingerly, he leaned against the invisible wall, and, finding 
      that it supported his weight, rested against it. 
      Ten thousand pounds of drast, he thought. Evidently the creature was a 
      sorcerer, from God-knows-where. Some other planet, perhaps. The creature 
      had tried to conjure a wish-granting demon, and had gotten him. It wanted 
      something from him—or else the bottle. All very unreasonable, but Arthur 
      Gammet was beginning to suspect that most wizards were unreasonable 
      people. 
      "I'll try to get your drast," Arthur said, feeling that he had to say 
      something. "But I'll have to go back to the—ah—underworld to get it. That 
      handwaving stuff is out." 
      "All right," the monster said to him, standing at the edge of the pentagon 
      and leering in. "I trust you. But remember, I can call you any time I 
      want. You can't get away, you know, so don't even try. By the way, my name 
      is Neelsebub." 
      "Any relation to Beelzebub?" Arthur asked. 
      "Great -grandfather," Neelsebub replied, looking suspiciously at Arthur. 
      "He was an army man. Unfortunately, he—" Neelsebub stopped abruptly, 
      glaring angrily at Arthur. "But you demons know all about that! Begone! 
      And bring that drast!" 
      Arthur Gammet vanished again. 

      He materialized on the corner of Second Avenue and Ninth Street, where he 
      had first vanished. His overcoat was at his feet, his clothes filled with 
      perspiration. He staggered for a moment to hold his balance—since he had 
      been leaning against the wall of force when Neelsebub had vanished 
      him—picked up his overcoat and hurried to his apartment. Luckily, there 
      had been only a few people around. Two housewives gulped and walked 
      quickly away. A nattily dressed man blinked four or five times, took a 
      step forward as though he wanted to ask something, changed his mind and 
      hurried off toward Eighth Street. The rest of the people either hadn't 
      seen him or just didn't give a damn.
      In his two-room apartment Arthur made one feeble attempt to dismiss the 
      whole thing as dream. Failing miserably, he began to outline his 
      possibilities. 
      He could produce the drast. That is, perhaps he could if he found out what 
      it was. The stuff Neelsebub considered valuable might be about anything. 
      Lead, perhaps, or iron. Even that would stretch his meagre earnings to the 
      breaking-point.
      He could notify the police. And be locked-up in an asylum. Forget that 
      one. 
      Or, he could not produce the drast—and spend the rest of his life in a 
      bottle. Forget that one, too.
      All he could do was wait until Neelsebub conjured him again, and find out 
      then what drast was. Perhaps it was common dirt. He could get that from 
      his uncle's farm in New Jersey, if Neelsebub could manage the 
      transportation. 
      Arthur Gammet telephoned the office and told them he was ill, and that he 
      expected to be ill for several days. After that he fixed a bite of food in 
      his kitchenette, feeling quite proud of his good appetite. Not everyone 
      faced with the strong possibility of being shut up in a bottle could have 
      tucked away a meal that well. He tidied up the place, and changed into a 
      light Palm Beach suit. It was four-thirty in the afternoon. He stretched 
      out on the bed and waited. Along about nine-thirty he disappeared. 
      "Changed your skin again," Neelsebub commented. "Where's the drast?" His 
      tail twitched eagerly as he hurried around the pentagon. 
      "It's not hidden behind me," Arthur said, turning to look at Neelsebub. 
      "I'll have to have more information." He adopted a nonchalant pose, 
      leaning against the invisible lines that radiated from the chalk. "And 
      I'll have to have your promise that once I produce it you'll leave me 
      alone. " 
      "Of course," Neelsebub answered cheerfully. "I can only ask for one wish 
      anyhow. Tell you what, I'll swear the great oath of Satanas. That's 
      absolutely binding, you know." 
      "Satanas?" 
      "One of our early presidents," Neelsebub said with a reverential air. "My 
      great grandfather Beelzebub served under him. Unfortunately—oh, well, you 
      know all that." 

      Neelsebub swore the great oath of Satanas, and very impressive it was. The 
      blue mists in the room were edged in red when he was done, and the 
      outlines of the huge bottle shifted eerily in the dim light. Arthur was 
      perspiring freely, even in his summer suit. He wished he were a 
      cold-producing demon. 
      "That's it," Neelsebub said, standing erectly in the middle of the room, 
      his tail looped around his wrist. There was a strange look in his eyes, a 
      look of one recalling past glories. 
      "Now what sort of information do you want?" 
      Neelsebub began pacing the floor in front of the pentagon, his tail 
      dragging. 
      "Describe this drast to me." 
      "Well, it's soft, heavy—" 
      That could be lead. 
      "And yellow." 
      Gold. 
      "Hmm," Arthur said, staring at the bottle. "I don't suppose it's ever 
      gray, is it? Or dark brown?" 
      "No. It's always yellow. With sometimes a 'reddish hue." 
      Still gold. Arthur contemplated the red-scaled monster in front of him, 
      pacing up and down with ill-concealed eagerness. Ten thousand pounds of 
      gold. That would come to ... No, better not think of it. Impossible. 
      "I'll need a little time," Arthur said. "Perhaps sixty or seventy years. 
      Tell you what, I'll call you as soon as—"
      Neelsebub interrupted him with a huge roar of laughter. Arthur had tickled 
      his rudimentary sense of humor, evidently, because Neelsebub was hugging 
      his haunches, screaming with mirth. 
      "Sixty or seventy years!" Neelsebub shouted, and the bottle shook, and 
      even the lines of the pentagon seemed to waver. "I'll give you sixty or 
      seventy minutes! Or the bottle!"
      "Now just a minute," Arthur said, from the far side of the pentagon. "I'll 
      need a little—hold it!" He had just had an idea, and, it was undeniably 
      the best idea he had ever had. More, it was his own idea. 
      "I'll have to have the exact formula you used to get me," Arthur said. 
      "Must check with the main office to be sure everything is in order." 
      The monster raved and swore, and the, air turned black and purple; the 
      bottle rang in sympathetic vibration with Neelsebub's voice, and the very 
      room seemed to sway. But Arthur Gammet stood firm. He explained to 
      Neelsebub, patiently, seven or eight times, that it would do no good to 
      bottle him, since he would never get his gold that way. All he wanted was 
      the formula, and certainly that wouldn't—
      Finally he got it. 
      "And no tricks!" Neelsebub thundered finally, gesturing at the bottle with 
      both hands and his tail. Arthur nodded feebly and reappeared in his room. 

      The next few days he spent in a frenzied search around New York. Some of 
      the ingredients of the incantation were easy to fill—the sprig of 
      mistletoe, for example, from a florist, and the sulphur. Graveyard mold 
      was more difficult, as was a bat's left wing. What really had him stumped 
      for a while was the severed hand of the murdered man. He finally procured 
      one from a store that specialized in filling orders for medical students. 
      He had the dealer's guarantee that the body to which the hand belonged had 
      died a violent death. Arthur suspected that the dealer was trying to humor 
      him, but there was really very little he could do about it. 
      Among other things, he bought a large bottle. It was surprisingly 
      inexpensive. There were really compensations for living in New York, he 
      decided. There seemed to be nothing—literally nothing one couldn't. buy.
      In three days he had all his materials, and at midnight of the third night 
      he had arranged them on the floor of his apartment. The light of a 
      three-quarters full moon was shining in the window—the incantation had 
      been vague as to what phase it should be—and everything seemed to be in 
      order. Arthur drew the pentagon, lighted the candles, burned the incense, 
      and started the chant. He figured that, by following directions carefully, 
      he should be able to conjure Neelsebub. His one wish would be that 
      Neelsebub leave him strictly alone. He couldn't see how that would fail. 
      The blue mists spread through the room as he mumbled the formula, and soon 
      he could see something growing in the center of the pentagon. 
      "Neelsebub! " he cried. But it wasn't. 
      The thing in the pentagon was about fifteen feet high when the incantation 
      was finished. It had to stoop almost to the ground to fit under Arthur's 
      ceiling. It was a fearful-looking thing, with wings and a tiny head and a 
      hole in its chest. 
      Arthur Gammet had conjured the wrong demon. 

      "What's all this?" the demon asked, shooting a jet of ice water out of his 
      chest. The water splashed against the invisible walls of the pentagon and 
      rolled to the floor. It must have been pure reflex, because Arthur's room 
      was pleasantly cool.
      "I want my one wish," Arthur said. The demon was blue and impossibly thin; 
      his wings were vestigial stumps. They flapped once or twice against his 
      bony chest before he answered.
      "I don't know what you are or how you got me here,"' the demon said. "But 
      it's clever. It is undeniably clever."
      "Let's not chatter," Arthur replied nervously, wondering how soon 
      Neelsebub was going to conjure him again. "I want ten thousand pounds of 
      gold. Also known as drast, hakatinny, and the old sup-der-oop. " At any 
      moment, he thought, he might find himself inside a bottle. 
      "Well," the cold-producing demon said. "You seem to be laboring under the 
      mistaken impression that I'm—" 
      "You have twenty-four hours."
      "I'm not a rich man," the cold-producing demon said. "Small businessman. 
      But perhaps if you give me time—" 
      "Or the bottle," Arthur said. He pointed to the large bottle in one 
      corner, then realized it would never hold fifteen feet of cold-producing 
      demon.
      "The next time I conjure you I'll have a bottle big enough," Arthur said. 
      "I didn't think you'd be so tall."
      "We have stories about people disappearing," the demon mused. "So this is 
      what happens to them. The underworld. Don't suppose anyone would believe 
      me, though." 
      "Get that drast," Arthur said. "Begone!"
      The cold-producing demon was gone. 
      Arthur Gammet knew he could not afford more than twenty-four hours. Even 
      that was probably cutting it too thin, he thought, because one could never 
      tell when Neelsebub would decide he had had enough time. There was no 
      telling what the red-scaled monster would do if he were disappointed a 
      third time. Arthur found that, toward the end of the day, he was clutching 
      the steam pipe. A lot of good that would do if he were conjured! But it 
      was nice to have something solid to grasp. 
      It was a shame also, he thought, to have to impose on the cold-producing 
      demon that way. It was pretty obvious that the demon wasn't a real demon, 
      any more than Arthur was. Well, he would never use the bottle on him. It 
      would do no good if Neelsebub weren't satisfied. 

      Finally he mumbled the incantation again.
      "You'll have to make your pentagon wider," the cold-producing demon said, 
      stooping uncomfortably inside. "I haven't got room for—"
      "Begone!" Arthur said, and feverishly rubbed out the pentagon. He sketched 
      it again, this time using the area of the whole room. He lugged the 
      bottle—the same one, since he hadn't found one fifteen feet high—into the 
      kitchen, stationed himself in the closet, and went through the formula 
      again. Once more the thick, twisting blue mists gathered. 

      "Now don't be hasty," the cold-producing demon said, from within the 
      pentagon. "I haven't got the old sup-der-oop yet. There's a tie-up, and I 
      can explain everything." He beat his wings to part the mist. Beside him 
      was a bottle, fully ten feet high. Within it, green with rage, was 
      Neelsebub. He seemed to be shouting, but the bottle was stoppered. No 
      sound came through. 
      "Got the formula out of the library," the demon said, "Could have knocked 
      me over when the thing worked. Always been a hard-headed businessman, you 
      know. Don't like this super-natural stuff. But, you have to fact facts. 
      Anyhow, I got hold of this demon here—" He jerked a spidery arm at the 
      bottle— "But he wouldn't come across. So I bottled him." The 
      cold-producing demon heaved a deep sigh when Arthur smiled. It was like a 
      reprieve. 
      "Now, I don't want you to bottle me," the cold-producing demon went on, 
      "because I've got a wife and three kids. You know how it is. Insurance 
      slump and all that, I couldn't raise ten thousand pounds of drast with an 
      army. But as soon as I persuade this demon here—" 
      "Never mind about the drast," Arthur said. 
      "Just take the demon with you. Keep him in storage. Inside the bottle, of 
      course." 
      "I'll do that," the blue-winged insurance man said. "And about that 
      drast—" 
      "Forget it," Arthur said warmly. After all, insurance men have to stick 
      together. "Handle fire and theft?" "General accident is more my line," the 
      ance man said. "But you know, I've been thinking—"
      Neelsebub raved and swore inside the bottle while the two insurance men 
      discussed the intricacies of their profession.